JOHN YANG, PBS ANCHOR: Good evening. I m John
Yang. Judy Woodruff is away. On the news hour
tonight, I talk with Green party nominee Jill
Stein. Why she s raising millions of dollars
for an election recount. Then, striving for
peace, the Colombian president and FARC rebels
sign a revised treaty hoping to end, 52 years
of war. Plus, on Thanksgiving day, the history
of American cuisine. We travel to the 10 restaurants
that changed the way the nation eats.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Regional food is part of
the heritage of America and it s something
that s being brought back, particularly southern
food.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
YANG: And, how one impoverished town on the
outskirts of south Africa s sprawling vineyards
is surprising the industry by building its
own winery.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Part of their project
is novelty which will take them quite far
as well. People come they want to have a look.
"Hey, these guys are doing something neat"
(END VIDEO CLIP)
YANG: All that and more on tonight s PBS Newshour.
Americans took time out today to celebrate
thanksgiving with feasts, parades and football.
In New York, the annual Macy s thanksgiving
day parade went smoothly, amidst tight security.
Thousands of heavily-armed officers were in
the streets, and police blocked intersections
with dump trucks filled with sand. Meanwhile
in Washington, president Obama, in a recorded
video message, called for unity.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BARRACK OBAMA, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:
Thanksgiving reminds us that no matter our
differences, we re still one people, part
of something bigger than ourselves. We are
communities that move forward together. We
are neighbors who look out for one another,
especially those among us with the least.
We are always, simply, Americans.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
YANG: overseas, U. S. Forces helping Iraqi
troops fighting in is-held Mosul enjoyed a
welcome respite. Soldiers gathered to play
football and eat holiday dinners just south
of the frontlines.
The Islamic state also carried out a massive
suicide bombing south of Baghdad today, killing
at least 56 people, though some reports put
the toll as high as 100. 20 of the dead were
Iranian Shiite pilgrims. Another 45 people
were injured. I m joined now via skype by
special correspondent Jane Ferguson, who s
reporting for us from northern Iraq. Jane,
what can you tell us about what happened today?
JANE FERGUSON, PBS CORRESPONDENT: John, among
those killed in today s bombing were many
Iranian Shiite pilgrims on their way back
to Baghdad for a religious occasion in the
holy city of Karbala about 70 miles south
of the capital.
The suicide bomber detonated a huge truck
bomb at a busy gas and restaurant where several
buses of pilgrims were. I. S. I. S. has claimed
responsibility for the attack. The group regularly
target Shiites who they view as not true Muslims.
Meanwhile, it s Shiites militias who have
cut off the final root
[0: 05: 00. 1]
between ISIS held Mosul city and the rest
of the so-called caliphate. To the west of
Mosul, Militia is known as batter brigade
have taken control of a crucial road in and
out of Mosul which effectively cuts off ISIS
militants in Mosul city stopping them from
resupplying or retreating.
The Militias have made an unprecedented deal
with Iraqi Kurdish fighters called Peshmerga
to cooperate in cutting off Mosul. In the
east of the city, Iraqi troops have been battling
ISIS since the launch of an offensive to retake
the city over six weeks ago. They have been
engaged in street to street fighting as the
militants have dug in to the heavily populated
city.
It s a tough fight and progress is slow. They
expect it will be another two or three months
before they can take the city. Over 5,000
US Troops are in Iraq, advising and supporting
the Iraqi military, in its campaign against
ISIS rocket fire, artillery, surveillance
and special forms. John?
YANG: Jane Ferguson in Erbil, Iraq, thanks.
At least 67 workers died in southeast china
today when scaffolding collapsed at a power
plant construction site. It happened in the
city of Fengcheng, and is one of the country s
deadliest work safety accidents in more than
two years. Cement slabs and metal beams crushed
all but three of the 70 workers when a support
platform gave way.
An investigation into what caused the collapse
is underway. In Syria, rebels in the besieged
city of Aleppo have agreed to a UN plan to
allow aid deliveries and evacuate the wounded.
But UN officials said they re still waiting
for approval from the Syrian government. The
UN s humanitarian adviser said they re poised
to act once they get the go-ahead. He spoke
today in Geneva.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JAN EGELAND, UN HUMANITARIAN TASK FORCE: The
trucks are ready, the humanitarian workers
are ready, greatest humanitarian workers will
be able to go with hundreds of truckloads
of medical equipment, food and all of the
other things needed in eastern Aleppo.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
YANG: Eastern Aleppo has been under siege
since July. Much-needed food and medical supplies
haven t been able to reach the area since
then. Separately, a US service member died
when an improvised explosive device detonated
in northern Syria. A sixth child has now died
from injuries suffered in a school bus crash
in Chattanooga, Tennessee earlier this week.
Police say, Johnthony Walker strayed from
his route and was speeding on a curvy road
when his bus ran into a tree.
He faces six counts of vehicular homicide.
Five children remain hospitalized. The bus
company has had 346 crashes over the past
two years alone. Hurricane Otto gained speed
and intensity today. It slammed into Nicaragua s
Caribbean coast as a category 2 storm. The
unusually strong, late- season hurricane packedwinds up to 110 miles an hour.
Officials evacuated more than 10,000 people,
including many who crowded onto buses bound
for shelters. Otto is expected to weaken to
a tropical storm later today. Still to come
on the Newshour, we talk to Jill Stein about
her plans to ask for an election recount.
Another peace deal to end Colombia s decades
of civil war. The surgeon general s call to
address the addiction crisis, and much more.
Jill Stein, the Green party s presidential
nominee is preparing to request recounts in
key battleground states. In just a day, she s
raised over $4 million dollars through an
online fundraising page to support recounts
in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.
Although Hillary Clinton leads president-elect
trump in the popular vote by more than 2 million
votes, she trails Mr. Trump by narrow margins
in those three states. To discuss the push
for recounts, green party presidential nominee
doctor Jill Stein joins me now from Camden,
Maine. Dr. Stein, welcome.
Let me ask you, will you be filing these requests?
I know the deadline is tomorrow in Wisconsin,
and then next week in Michigan and Pennsylvania.
Will you be filing in all three states?
JILL STEIN, GREEN PARTY PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE:
Yes, we will. The big question was whether
the American people supported this enough
that they would fund it. All we did was put
out the press release, put up a web site
[0: 10: 00. 2]
and the funding for it in. The American people
are looking for a positive step that we can
take to ensure that our votes are being counted
and that they re counted accurately.
YANG: And what s your goal with this? Do you
think you can overturn the election with these
recounts?
STEIN: I don t think that s likely and this
is not done to benefit one candidate at the
expense of the other. This is being done because
American s came out of this election, not
happy campers. 80 percent of Americans according
to the New York Times poll, felt disgusted
this election.
These were two candidates that, you know,
largely people were voting out of fear and
the question was which one do you trust less
-- you know, the most disliked and untrusted
candidates in our history. I think Americans
are looking for a way that we can improve
the system.
It s not just an academic question, but it s
the question of the job, the healthcare we
can t afford and a generation locked in debt,
non-academic is very up close and personal
and what I have been shocked by is in this
holiday weekend when usually people retreat
to the pleasures of their families and the
wonderful food and all that, you know, we
don t see that happening at all. People are
really wanting to jump forward toward creating
a political system that we feel like we can
have confidence in.
YANG: As you explain, we are talking to you
by Skype and we re hearing other news organizations
trying to reach you. Do you have any in evidence
those three states of any irregularities,
hacking, any problems in those states other
than the narrow margins? Why pick those three
states?
STEIN: Because the margins were narrow and
if they were hacking, those were the states
you would expect to see where the difference
is very close and the impact would have been
a small, statistical change that would have
changed the outcome and just left it with
a very minor difference in the votes between
the two candidates.
There is not a smoking gun here, but what
the election integrity experts tell us and
the advocates for verified voting, what they
tell us, is that -- well in fact, it s not
just them, you know, this is sort of the obvious,
the elephant s in the room. This was an election
in which we saw hacking all over the place,
we saw hacking into the democratic party database
and hacking into voter database in Illinois
and Arizona and evidence that it was attempted
much more broadly and we also saw hacking
into personal accounts.
At the same time, we have a voting system
which has been proven to basically be wide
open to hackers. That is, we have voting machines
in Wisconsin, for example, that have been
barred from California, that got actually
made illegal in California because they have
been proven to be drop-dead simple to go in
and reprogram with malicious software.
So we re sake you wouldn t get into an airplane
and wait for it to crash to decide you need
quality assurance and a backup system. Our
voting system is no less important and we re
basically calling for a system to verify voting.
We shouldn t have to show there s been a disaster
in order to safeguard a very vulnerable voting
system.
YANG: Green party nominee Jill Stein. Thankyou so much for joining us.
STEIN: Thank you so much.
YANG: To dig deeper into the recount push,
I m joined by David Sanger, national security
correspondent for the New York Times, he has
been following this story. David, welcome,
thanks for coming in on Thanksgiving day.
DAVID SANGER, SECURITY CORRESPONDENT FOR NEW
YORK TIMES: Thank you. Happy Thanksgiving
to you. We re all given thanks for Gwen s
life.
YANG: Absolutely, thank you. Where does this
talk come from? The sudden talk about recounts
in those three states come from?
SANGER: John, I think it comes from the fact
as Dr. Stein indicated the popular vote has
now risen, it s over 2 million lead for secretary
Clinton, and the margin in the three critical
states of Michigan, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania
has narrowed and that has prompted people
who have been looking at the hacking questions
and others to say if we were getting down
to such small amounts, do we need to go check
because of possibly miscounting but also because
to have the risk of hacking.
Now, when you look at Pennsylvania where the
margin is still about 70,000 or so, the chances
that this would change the result are pretty
miniscule but there may be other good reasons
for doing it anyway.
[0: 15: 00. 1]
YANG: A group of computer scientists called
the Clinton campaign last week to urge them
to do this. Do they have any evidence or any
proof that something happened in these three
states?
SANGER: They don t seem to. I think the telling
issue here is the Clinton campaign has not
asked for a recount and I think that tells
you that they don t believe this would alter
the result.
What they do have is looking at the variance
between where a number of the pre-election
polls were in, of course, as we all know,
those were notoriously bad in these cases
and where the vote count has come out, and
then some of the usual variances that you
see just precinct by precinct, and there are
always some number of precincts where it looks
like there were several more thousand voters
who came in or several thousand fewer and
it doesn t match up with the numbers.
It usually comes out in the wash of doing
the verification of the vote. But in Wisconsin
and Michigan, there are paper backups and
that s the critical thing, digitized as we
get, John. Voting is one thing where you sort
of want to take a big step back and always
have a paper backup. In Pennsylvania, that s
true only in a few parts of the state.
YANG: Dr. Stein says she doesn t think this
would change the outcome and you have suggested
it s unlikely. So what s the point of going
through this?
SANGER: One point is every state has a different
system and different levels of cyber security.
And if there was one big lesson from the 2016
election, apart from the issues between the
candidates, is that we are vulnerable to a
foreign power to come in and attempting to
influence the election and that s of course
what the intelligence agencies were saying
about the hacks of the DNC and John Podesta,
the chairman of the Clinton campaign s e-mails.
If that s the case, we have to all up our
game for sanctity of the election system.
I think if states understand, that they are
going to be required to go back and look at
the paper ballots either on a sample or full
basis, they will probably invest more in their
cyber security if they believe that there
is a chance that there could be hacking, they
need a better system.
In this particular case, when the issue is
this narrow, if they don t go back and do
it, there will be conspiracy theories between
now and 30 years from now saying the 2016
election, there was something suspect there.
So if they pass up this chance, they will
open up to the conspiracy theories having
their case even if their case is unfounded.
YANG: So, is it do it to prove that nothing
happened that there was no hacking?
SANGER: I think it s do it to be sure there
was no hacking and do it to make sure states
recognize if they don t have the best cyber
security around which includes understanding
what sort of malware can come into the systems
and investing in the front end, they probably
will have to pay a lot more money at the back
end if elections close.
Remember, the way the states are doing this
right now, you only do a recount if the two
people running are within half a percent or
less of each other. For a half of an election,
that wouldn t make sense because any sophisticated
hacker is going to know that the state s cutoff
is half of one percent and make sure the margin
is slightly larger than that to avoid an automatic
recount. So you ve got to stay one thought
out ahead of some very sophisticated hackers.
YANG: David Sanger of the New York Times.
Thanks for joining us.
SANGER: Thank you.
YANG: The president of Colombia signed a new
peace deal with FARC rebels this morning,
about six weeks after voters narrowly rejected
an earlier agreement. Days after that vote,
president Juan Manuel Santos received the
Nobel peace prize for his efforts to end that
five-decade OLD war. For more, I m joined
from Bogota by special correspondent Nadja
Drost. Nadja, how significant were the changes
that were made after the referendum?
NADJA DROST, PBS CORRESPONDENT: Well, John,
the government and the FARC said they incorporated
many if not most to have the changes that
no campaigners and opponents of the PCL had
voiced. The current PCL. That was just
[0: 20: 00. 3]
signed has included over 50 changes, among
them the FARC has promised that they will
reveal all information related to narco trafficking
and drug trafficking routes to help out law
enforcement. But could it say that many of
the changes in this new deal don t go far
enough in punishing the FARC in serious human
rights abuses.
For example, one to have the main arguments
is FARC leaders should not be able to run
for political office while still serving alternative
sentence force atrocities committed.
YANG: Why was the government insistent on
getting it renegotiated and signed quickly?
DROST: There is a real sense of urgency here
to get this peace process back on track because
simple referendum and the PCL failed on October
2nd. We have about 7,000 FARC fighters spread
out across the country in judicial limbo and
their demobilization has been paralyzed. While
there is a bilateral seize fire in place,
it s fragility was demonstrated. Earlier this
month two FARC guerillas were killed. This
weekend at least three random activists and
leaders in a social movement assassinated
and another one killed this morning.
YANG: What are the next steps? What are the
challenges in implementing this peace deal?
DROST: President Santos decided not to put
this new peace deal to a popular vote as he
did last time and it failed. Instead, he is
sending it immediately to congress for approval.
While we don t yet know if the implementation
of the deal will get fast tracked into congress
or dragged out in debates.
We know the opponents to this deal in congress
lead by former president Alavaro Uribe have
vowed to oppose the deal, but how much they ll
actually will be able to do in congress considering
they re a minority is it s not looking very
hopeful for them to actually help any legislative
changes.
YANG: Nadja, this has been a bit of a roller
coaster ride, the peace agreement reached,
rejected by the referendum, renegotiated and
signed. What s the mood of the public now?
DROST: We re here in Bogota s main square,
the Plaza Bolivar. There is definitely a sense
of, I would say, mild jubilation, but more
of that relief. However, I would say that
the patience of Colombians has been really
tested out with this peace process and it
hasn t been beneficial for anybody that this
peace deal has been going through so many
stages of limbo.
YANG: Nadja Drost in Bogota. Thanks for joining
us.
DROST: Thank you, john.
YANG: Stay with us, coming up on the Newshour,
10 restaurants that changed America. Black
south Africans entering a business that was
once off limits. And how a New York city deli
brings people together. But first, the tragic
toll of substance abuses in America. A new
surgeon general s report says it s not just
the heroin and opioid epidemic that s plaguing
the country. William Brangham has more:
WILLIAM BRANGHAM, PBS CORRESPONDENT: According
to the surgeon general s report more than
27 million Americans have problems with prescription
drugs, illegal drugs or alcohol. But just
a fraction of those people, only 10 percent,
get meaningful help. The report cites missed
opportunities for prevention and treatment
and it says our substance abuse costs the
country a staggering 440 billion a year. I m
joined by the US surgeon general Dr. Vivek
Murthy. Dr. , thank you very much for being
here.
VIVEK MURTHY, US SURGEON GENERAL: Really glad
to be with you.
BRANGHAM: This is a pretty sobering report.
Millions of people suffering, very, very few
people are getting help. When you compiled
all this data, were you surprised by what
you had found?
MURTHY: Well, I had seen the problem up close
as a doctor practicing medicine. When I came
into medicine, I expected as an internal medicine
doctor to primarily see people with diabetes,
heart disease and cancer, and I was shocked
by the number of patients who came under my
care who actually had substance abuse.
BRANGHAM: You were seeing this in private
practice before being tapped to be in the
federal government?
MURTHY: Yes, I have always seen this -- we
even -- starting in medical school itself
and then on throughout
[0: 25: 00. 1]
my medical career, the experience was not
unique to me but many of my clinician colleagues
were seeing the same thing and they were really
surprised.
When I became surgeon general and had the
privilege of travelling around the country
and hearing people s stories firsthand, I
found that every community was touched in
some way by substance abuse disorders. I went
to a small fishing village in Alaska called
Napaskiak which is accessible only by boat
and no roads to go there and even in this
small village of less than 500 people, the
small little building where they kept medications
had been broken into multiple times by people
seeking out prescription painkillers.
BRANGHAM: You say in this report that we as
a nation need to think differently about addiction
and to look at substance abuse and addiction
differently. How do we look at it now and
what would you like to see change?
MURTHY: Unfortunately, for too many people,
addiction is a disease of choice, they see
as a character flaw as evidence of moral failing,
but what we know they are clearly from the
science, is that addiction is actually none
of those things it s a chronic disease of
the brain.
We have good scientific studies that tell
us that addiction impacts the circuits in
your brain and in specific parts of the brain
that affect impulse control, decision making
and your stress and reward response. When
we understand that, we start to have a better
sense of why it is so easy for people to relapse
with substance abuse disorders and why people
experience withdrawal symptoms and cravings.
BRANGHAM: Can you explain -- that number really
jumps, 440 billion dollars in costs from substance
abuse. How do the costs add up?
MURTHY: These costs come from several streams.
One is from direct healthcare costs. Also
losses in workplace productivity as well as
criminal justice system costs. The good news
is we have evidence-based treatment and prevention
strategies at work. The problem is they re
just not getting it to enough people.
BRANGHAM: Why is that? You report details
quite a bit of these things that you argue
absolutely are proven to work but aren t being
used, why is that?
MURTHY: It s really striking and it s especially
striking when you recognize it. Not only do
we have a humanitarian reason to get treatments
to people but we know that for every dollar
that we invest in treatment we save four dollars
in healthcare costs, seven dollars in criminal
justice system costs. We have prevention programs
that are proven, that can save up to 64 dollars
for every one dollar invested.
A part of the reason that people haven t gotten
these treatments is that, as a country, number
one, we haven t invested enough in expansion
of treatment programs. Number two, we haven t
trained our clinicians widely enough in how
to recognize, diagnose and treat substance
abuse disorders and, third, there is this
ongoing, unfortunate stigma around substance
abuse disorders that prevents people fromseeking help in the first place.
BRANGHAM: On the prevention side, what is
it that works? What is it that we know can
be done to help people to stop these substanceabuse problems from developing?
MURTHY: Well, the good news is that, there
are prevention programs that don t just target
one particular kind of substance but they
can be effective reducing rates of use of
alcohol, tobacco as well as elicit substances
particularly by our youth and these programs
are varied but some of them are school-based
programs, one called the behavior game which
trains young children in how to deal with
stress in a healthy way and how to understand
some of these substances of misuse and understand
how to deal with them responsibly.
There are also community-based programs that
focus on education and on dealing with stress
in a healthy way. And this is a key point
which is, as I ve traveled around the country,
I have found many times when people are using
substances or when they begin, they begin
trying to medicate some type of pain they re
experiencing. It may not be physical pain.
It may be emotional pain or stress they re
experiencing. If we can help equip young people
in particular with healthy ways of dealing
with stress we can go a long way toward preventing
substance abuse disorders.
BRANGHAM: There are many people in the treatment
and the substance abuse world who are so cheered
by this report and it s called to action.
There are others say it is too little, too
late. I know Massachusetts senator Ed Markey
wrote that overdoses from the opioid epidemic
are still rising and he says, yet this report
fails to provide any detailed road map for
how best to curb opioid addiction. What s
your response to that?
MURTHY: A couple of things. Number one, in
this report we took a broad view of all substances.
We didn t just look at opioids but we also
looked at alcohol, and it may surprise many
people to recognize that alcohol leads to
the other substances in terms of cost and
lives lost.
So we dealt with a range of substances. If
you read the report carefully where you understand
there is in fact a road map
[0: 30: 00. 2]
for how we should approach prevention and
how we should approach treatment, there is
also attention to given to recovery because
what we have realized over time is that treatment
is not a two-week process where you go in,
get cured and are good to go. Instead, we
have to focus on long-term treatment because
this is a chronic illness. We give a fair
amount of attention to recovery services which
are the social supports and ongoing counseling
that people need in order to reduce the amount
of relapses.
My feeling is we have a number of concrete
steps in the report that communities can take
and we, in fact, dedicate the entire last
chapter of the report to action, to not just
defining the action doctors and nurses can
take but what policymakers and families and
law enforcement and teachers and educators
need to take.
This report has something for everyone. And
that s appropriate. Substance abuse disorders
touch everyone. That s something I ve seen
firsthand and we all need to play a part in
addressing addiction in America.
BRANGHAM: Alright. Dr. Vivek Murthy, surgeon
general of the United States. Thank you very
much.
MURTHY: Glad to be with you.
YANG: now, on this thanksgiving day, we devote
the rest of our broadcast to food, and a little
wine. First, economics correspondent Paul
Solman explores the histories of some of this
country s most iconic restaurants, and how
they reflected the cultural, social and economic
development of their times.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PAUL SOLMAN, PBS NEWSHOUR ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT:
In the heart of Harlem, Sylvia s, where for
50-plus years, presidents and pop stars, tourists
and locals have feasted on down home cooking.
TREN NESS WOODS-BLACK, SYLVIA S: What we serve
here at Sylvia s is authentic, soul-food cuisine,
rich in heritage that goes back over five
generations.
SOLMAN: Tren ness Woods-Black is a granddaughter
of the late Sylvia Woods from South Carolina.
WOODS-BLACK: So, you re going to get the original
farm to table, which is what soul food is.
PAUL FREEDMAN, YALE UNIVERSITY: You can t
write a book about American food without giving
a big place to African American cuisine, which
is arguably what American cuisine is at heart.
SOLMAN: Medieval historian Paul freedman,
who turned an academic fascination with Middle
Ages cuisine into a new career in his middle
ages, chronicling American food. His new book,
"Ten Restaurants That Changed America," begins
at Delmonico s in New York s financial district,
the new nation s first real restaurant.
FREEDMAN: By real, I mean a place that offered
a choice. A large menu, and a fairly wide
range of times when the place was open instead
of saying we serve at 1:00, take it or leave
it.
SOLMAN: What fascinated me, as a money buff,
was how our restaurants track our economic
growth.
So, when Delmonico s opens in the 1830s, that s
the beginning of what we now know as the American
economy?
FREEDMAN: It coincides with an America of
railroads, of rapid expansion to the West,
of industrialization and of increasing contact
with the rest of the world. It s not a place
for people who fancy themselves as squires
or aristocrats. It s a place for enterprising
people.
SOLMAN: But they are wealthy.
FREEDMAN: Definitely.
SOLMAN: The new money wanted food that was
fancy French, with new world twists. Delmonico s
steak, a rib-eye --
FREEDMAN: They invented Lobster Newburg. They
invented Baked Alaska.
SOLMAN: They even invented brunch.
TV HOST: Delmonico s is credited with creatingthis brunch dish -- Erin.
CONTESTANT: What is Eggs Benedict?
TV HOST: Good.
SOLMAN: This was the place to meet and eat,well into the 20th century.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We re going to Delmonico sfor supper, won t you join us?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: What will it be tonight,Delmonico s or the Plaza?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Lunch at Delmonico s!
FREEDMAN: And men and women would show up
together at night, but at lunch, it would
be men only.
SOLMAN: Gender exclusivity, which, at the
turn of the 20th century, invited a second
of freedman s top ten to enter the fray and
helped change America s expanding economy:
Schrafft s.
I remember going to Schrafft s in the 50s
for the sundaes, I believe. The ice cream
sundaes. That was a real treat.
FREEDMAN: I too remember going there with
my grandmother. It s one of the first restaurants
to cater to women, not just by providing a
safe atmosphere, but by providing the kind
of food that women were thought to like to
eat -- light food followed by very rich desserts.
SOLMAN: But now when Schrafft s starts in
1900, what does that say about what s happening
in the American economy?
FREEDMAN: We see the rise of a middle middle
class of the sort that we know. They want
a nice experience. They want food that is
relatively simple or not particularly French.
SOLMAN: A democratized middle class.
FREEDMAN: Yes, exactly. And so the restaurant
options are often for couples, you have to
wait for Howard Johnson s and roadside restaurants
for children really to be featured.
SOLMAN: Number three: Howard Johnson s, now
nearly extinct, with just one upstate New
York outpost for fried clams and Frankforts,
down from a thousand such orange-and-blue
emporia in its mid-20th-century heyday.
FREEDMAN: In the 1920s, the American dream
was not to own a house, the American dream
was to own a car and to drive with your family
around to look at the countryside.
SOLMAN: Sunday drives.
FREEDMAN: Sunday drives. Howard Deering Johnson
developed a restaurant concept that offered
food particularly by the side of the new highways
that were opening up for leisure driving.
SOLMAN: So the advent and success of Howard
Johnson s represents a further democratization
of the American economy?
FREEDMAN: Yes, and it may be an early symbol
of the hollowing out of the middle level.
SOLMAN: With HoJo s decline tracking growing
inequality.
FREEDMAN: Because on the one hand you would
have very democratic places like McDonald s.
And on the other hand you have more and more
fancy restaurants.
SOLMAN: Hoity-toity boites like change agent
number four, Le Pavillon, where chef and owner
Henri Soule sat A-listers up front, to see
and be seen.
FREEDMAN: So lots of other places like La
Caravelle, La Grenouille, all of them begin
with Le and La, imitated this pattern.
SOLMAN: Or number five, The Four Seasons,
birthplace of seasonal menus and the modern
power lunch in an increasingly financialized
economy.
FREEDMAN: When it started to have these power
lunches it was more media people. Advertising,
TV, book publishing.
SOLMAN: That s the 60s and 70s.
FREEDMAN: 60s and 70s. I asked one of the
owners if that was still true, if there were
still literary agents and authors, and he
looked at me pityingly. He looked at me as
if I had asked to send a telegram or where
the nearest automat was.
SOLMAN: Because it had become high end finance.
FREEDMAN: It s finance and real estate. Serious
money.
SOLMAN: There s one big apple restaurant togo: number six, Mamma Leone s.
FREEDMAN: People say, well how can you have
Italian food in the United States represented
by a place that was so mass market, so touristy.
That s part of the story of food in the United
States. Mamma Leone s was a pioneer of the
spectacle restaurant. And it introduced a
lot of people to Italian food.
SOLMAN: Marking the true globalization of
the American economy.
And that was also manifest on the West Coast.
Thus, number seven, The Mandarin in San Francisco,
where in 1961 chef-owner Cecilia Chang introduced
people to Chinese food north and west of Cantonese.
FREEDMAN: Not just one province of southern
China, as had been the case with Chinese food
up to that time.
SOLMAN: OK, we ve reached 1971 and Freedman s
restaurant number eight. America was now rich
enough to start caring about something new
in its food -- how fresh it was; how safe.
Thus Chez Panisse, in Berkeley, California,
where chef-owner Alice Waters was the change
agent...
FREEDMAN: Changing the way many, many people
eat. It s influenced what public schools serve.
It s influenced what Walmart and Target have
available in their produce sections. It s
influenced restaurants pretty far down the
price food chain.
SOLMAN: Number nine? Antoine s of New Orleans,
owned and run by the same family since 1840.
An example of regional American cuisine: in
this case. Creole.
CARTOON CHARACTER: You can t beat a good old
Back-bay Bayou Bunny Bordelais, a la Antoine.
SOLMAN: America as melting pot.
CARTOON CHARACTER: ZE Antoine of New Orleans?
CARTOON CHARACTER: I don t mean Antoine of
Flatbush!
FREEDMAN: Regional food is part of the heritage
of America and it s something that s being
brought back, particularly Southern food.
SOLMAN: Which brings us back to number 10,
Sylvia s in Harlem, where the Woods family
carries on old traditions, and new ones, like
the timely Thanksgiving take-home package
for an ever busier America.
WOODS-BLACK: You ve got turkey, you have dressing,
you have collard greens, macaroni and cheese,
cornbread, sweet potato pie, you have everything
that you need that in the end, you can take
a little flour and just like, put it on your
face to make you look like a Thanksgiving
dinner superstar.
SOLMAN: Without all the effort. Time is money,
wrote Ben Franklin in 1748, which is a key
reason Americans have been eating out, ever
since.
Reporting from New York, economics correspondentPaul Solman, thoroughly sated.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: And now, a second helping of our food
theme. At a part of the country where ethnic
cuisine can be found on nearly every street
corner, one entrepreneur is relying on refugees
to bring their home cooking to New York City
foodies.
William Brangham is back with a visit to a
Long Island kitchen,
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM, PBS NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT:
It s business as usual inside the kitchen
of Eat Offbeat -- a New York City catering
company. Recipes, prepared with precision
slicing and dicing, are cooked to perfection.
But the chefs here all have one thing in common:
they re refugees, and none of them, until
recently, had any formal culinary training
MANAL KAHI, FOUNDER EAT OFFBEAT: Today, we
have chefs from Syria, Iraq, Nepal, Eritrea,
the Ivory Coast, Guinea-Conakry. They re all
working each on their own dish and we have
a few deliveries happening this afternoon.
BRANGHAM: Manal Kahi created Eat Offbeat with
her brother Wissam last year. The idea came
to them a few years before, after Kahi kept
trying different brands of American made hummus
and nothing measured up to her grandmother s
recipe.
KAHI: I had recently moved to the U.S. from
Lebanon and I kind of missed my home. In the
midst of the refugee crisis back in Lebanon,
our grandmother happens to be from Aleppo,
from Syria, originally. It was relatively
natural for us to say if you want someone
as talented as our grandmother to make hummus
for New Yorkers, maybe we should see the refugees
coming from Syria. We probably would findsomeone who s just like her.
BRANGHAM: That idea soon grew beyond just
Syrians -- Kahi believed that talented home
cooks from across the globe could offer New
Yorkers unique flavors, prepared in traditional
ways.
KAHI: Cuisines like Iraqi food, Syrian, Nepali,
Eritrean, it s not really cuisines that you
can find around every corner even here in
New York, as cosmopolitan as it can be. When
we say authentic, it s not necessarily the
way it s made in that country or it s been
made in that country hundred years ago. It s
the way they make it at home, the way they
eat it with their families. That s the way
we re selling it.
BRANGHAM: Eat Offbeat partners with the International
Rescue Committee to find their chefs, and
twelve of them are now employed with the company.
Because it s their first time working in a
professional kitchen, they need a bit of training,
and so, the culinary process is overseen by
head chef Juan Suarez De Lezo. He s worked
at some of the top restaurants in both Spain
and the U.S.
JUAN SUAREZ DE LEZO, HEAD CHEF: I m teaching
them how to move in a professional kitchen,
how to work, how to organize, how to balance
flavors, because at the end, they ve been
cooking always for their families which is
amazing, but in this case, now they re cooking
for New Yorkers. So, they need to adapt thoseflavors in somehow for the city.
BRANGHAM: For Rachana Rimal, a Nepalese chef,
she s been preparing a dish that is generally
served at special occasions in her country.
RACHANA RIMAL, CHIEF, EAT OFFBEAT: This isa chicken ball, actually.
BRANGHAM: Like a meatball?
RIMAL: Like a meatball but I put a lot of
spices on it, like onions and my ingredients
here, culmi, mustard. I put everything here.
BRANGHAM: Rimal s daughter Satakshi came to
the U.S. with her a few years ago when they
fled Nepal as a family. She works as the kitchen
manager for Eat Offbeat. With a meticulous
eye, she oversees deliveries, portion sizes,
and, for the first time in her life, keeping
her own mom in line.
SATAKSHI RIMAL, KITCHEN MANAGER, EAT OFFBEAT:
I get to boss her around here and she gets
to boss me around at home. So, I think weeven each other out pretty well.
BRANGHAM: Larry Younck is a senior refugee
resettlement officer for the United Nations
in Washington, D.C. Younck says cooking is
often a perfect job for refugees when they
first arrive to the United States.
LARRY YOUNCK, SENIOR REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT
OFFICER, UNITED NATIONS: Refugees are expected
to be self-supporting very quickly, a few
months after arriving here, and to find jobs
in the U.S. and that can be a challenge when
you don t speak English or you speak limited
English and your job skills maybe are hard
to transfer from your home country. But when
it comes to food, food communicates regardless
of whether you can speak English or not.
BRANGHAM: Younck also believes more companies
should follow Eat Offbeat s lead when it comes
to hiring refugees.
YOUNCK: What we see is refugees in general
in a lot of walks of life are much more entrepreneurial
than typically Americans are because, again,
they ve taken risks. They know what it is
to try something and maybe you succeed and
maybe you don t.
BRANGHAM: But Manal Kahi wants her company
to go further, not just to offer jobs, but
to help change the perception of refugees
as just being vulnerable, needy people.
KAHI: That s exactly what they re trying to
prove wrong. In our opinion, refugees are
very skilled. They bring with them a lot of
skills, a lot of talent, a lot of heritage
that they can share with their host communities.
And given the right opportunity, the right
space, they have a lot to contribute for the
local economy, and for the local communities.
BRANGHAM: And for employees like Satakshi
Rimal, she says the kitchen has become a place
where chefs do much more than simply cook.
RIMAL: The best I could describe is it s a
second home to everybody. It s like a bunch
of aunts coming in, cooking at a common kitchen.
And, you know, it s like joint family so you
have everything that happens in a household.
There s screaming, there s, "hey, don t put
too much of this. Don t put so much of it."Even if that s not their dish.
BRANGHAM: Eat Offbeat mainly caters to large
groups, but is hoping to expand into a delivery
service in the coming months. And as for the
hummus -- Kahi says her company s recipe would
make grandma proud.
Mmm, that is great.
For the "PBS NewsHour", I m William Brangham
in New York.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: What you may not realize about your
wasted Thanksgiving leftovers: a shocking
35 percent of turkey meat doesn t get eaten.
That s more than 200 million pounds that ends
up in landfills. Read more on our website,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
YANG: From food to drink, our Thanksgiving
meal theme continues with a story about a
new vintage from South Africa.
Special correspondent Martin Seemungal brings
us the story of some fledgling vintners trying
their hands at the ancient craft in the unlikeliest
of places.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL, PBS NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
(voice-over): South Africa s breathtaking
vineyards near Cape Town, perfectly manicured
estates spreading for miles in every direction,
famous for world class wines. But a world
away, from the sprawling townships on the
outskirts of the city -- infamous for forced
resettlement of mixed race and black South
Africans, for crime and poverty -- you have
to look pretty hard to find a common link
-- but it is there, one little square among
a sea of shacks: a man planting a vineyard.
Manelisi Mapukata is part of an innovative
collective; growing wine grapes in small plots
that will one day make wine. The township
winery started production using grapes from
those traditional winemaking areas, Sauvignon
Blanc, Chardonnay, Pinotage, but the labels
are unique... The Flats, Philippi, names from
this part of town. Ultimately, more and more
of the grapes will come from these tiny township
plots.
MANELISI MAPUKATA, VINEYARD FARMER: I feel
proud about it because if just give me enough
time also I will learn more about grapes.
How it s important to have in our townships.
People can learn. People can come to visitalso to see what is happening.
SEEMUNGAL: The vines he is planting here won t
actually be ready to bear fruit for another
three years, but after that, he will have
a guaranteed harvest every year, and that
means a guaranteed income.
That guaranteed income is an enormously important
project to the farmers. Many have spent years
growing and selling vegetables and have been
at the mercy of fluctuating prices. Those
empty rows in a section of this small plot
will soon be growing grapes and ultimately
earn annually as much as all vegetables combined.
Lulama says it will change their lives.
LULAMA, VINEYARD FARMER: It means that we
want to generate more income so that we can
put bread on the table for our children and
the generations to come.
SEEMUNGAL: They stand to double what they
are making now. The average income here is
roughly $1,800 a year. Easy to understand
why people are energized, why word is spreading.
Nomhle Zondani is marketing the Township Winery
internationally, and here in South Africa,
she also has to manage expectations amongthese first time growers.
NOMHLE ZONDANI, MARKETER, THE TOWNSHIP WINERY:
Its not going to be an easy money making scheme.
You re not going to get rich in like two years.
So, within that five years, you will get exposure.
We will bring people to say this is an idea
that we have we would love to grow it and
after five years, we would then we will have
this whatever grape we can harvest from those
vines.
SEEMUNGAL: Graham Knox is an expert with years
of experience at all levels of winemaking,
now a key partner in the township winery.
Hard as it is to believe he says the soil
in these townships is perfect for wine grapes.
GRAHAM KNOX, THE TOWNSHIP WINERY: To grow
vines in the townships brings a response of
surprise, incredulousness. And this is an
opportunity to take the land that s in the
township that doesn t have that huge price
tag to enable the ladies to benefit from their
works to make a living from growing vines
and grapes in a way that is completely impossible
in Stellenbosch.
SEEMUNGAL: Stellenbosch -- about an hour away
-- is home to some of South Africa s premier
wine estates. Warwick is one of them, a pioneer
in its own right. Nearly 40 years ago, Warwick s
Norma Ratcliffe was one of the first womento make wine in South Africa.
NORMA RATCLIFFE, WARWICK WINE ESTATE: I started
with six barrels of wine, and I went through
all the stages that they will go through,
and a part of being a woman winemaker in those
days was novelty. Part of their project is
novelty which will take them quite far as
well. People come they want to have a look.
Hey, these guys are doing something neat.
SEEMUNGAL: The plan is to showcase that novelty
by converting this old cement factory in one
of the townships to a winery Knox hopes that
in a few years time, it will be ready to process
the grapes that will be harvested here.
KNOX: And start to come in to those big windows.
SEEMUNGAL: He says it will be the focal pointof the township winery project.
KNOX: People who drink wine absolutely love
to visit wineries. International press and
wine traders are fascinated by the idea that
we want to grow grapes in the township.
SEEMUNGAL: And there is more to this story
than the novelty of growing grapes in the
township and the economic benefits it will
provide. For decades black and mixed race
south Africans were the laborers in the wine
estates. With only a few exceptions, ownership
has remained in white hands.
Arlene Van Wyk says her father and grandfather
were wine farm workers. She says the idea
of being a winegrower was always an impossible
dream. But now, she s preparing the ground
to plant her own vineyard.
ARLENE VAN WYK, VINEYARD FARMER: I ve been
waiting all my life. I ve been poor all my
life. So, now, today, even the farm workers
kids can even now become farmers.
For me, there s a big change in the last 30
years. There s a lot of white people out there
that wants to help us as colored people and
black people. The more doors it will open,
more of our black people will have opportunity
to have our own vineyards, our own wine cellars
and obviously sell the best wines.
SEEMUNGAL: Norma Ratcliffe understands the
impact apartheid had and believes this is
an important step.
RATCLIFFE: I think its going to give these
people a lot more than a stake. I think its
going to give them a bit of upliftment. It s
going to say I m doing something and I m worth
something.
SEEMUNGAL: Lulama has turned a dusty corner
of Guletu Township into an oasis of hope,
and she is deeply proud, even though it is
in the middle of a poor township.
LULAMA: I don t think the beauty of the place
matters. What matters is that you do what
you want to do. You want to succeed. You want
to reach your goals.
SEEMUNGAL: They understand success will not
come easy. But these new winegrowers -- in
the most unlikely of places are determined
to get there -- one tiny vineyard at a time.
For the "PBS NewsHour", I m Martin Seemungal
in Cape Town.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: Finally tonight, another in our "Brief
But Spectacular" series where we ask. Tonight,
we hear from Steve Cohen, owner of New York s
Second Avenue Deli, who gives us his take
on the pastrami, sliced thin with the side
of schmoozing.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
STEVE COHEN, NEW YORK S SECOND AVENUE DELI:
You meet people in the deli, and it s like
you re their best friend. I saw it here in
1981, right before Passover. My favorite part
of the job is meeting people, talking to people.
I have people that came in as customers and
now they are friends. I go to their weddings,
their bar mitzvahs, and, unfortunately, I
go to their deaths.
You know, it s a good business from a social
standpoint. As a business, it s a little difficult
kosher deli business. The food cost is quite
large. Nobody has to throw a benefit for us,
but it is a fact.
We have vats and vats of beats. It s briskets.
We have roast beefs. We have pastramis. They
have to be steamed properly. They kept properly.
So, it s just a little more difficult to run
and to make money at, to tell you the truth.
There is a lot of exclusive restaurants in
New York that shall remain nameless. You go
to those restaurants and say, look what Ihave, look what I can do.
They come to a deli and you say, you know
what? Look what we have. Look what we can
do. We re all a group and friends. And theytalk. It s the great equalizer.
When you come to New York, one of the reasons
is pastrami or deli. We have the matzo ball
soup. We have a fresh stock pot going.
Our pastrami is mouth watering. You just slice
thin. It s the bacaya (ph), which is a gift.
We have something pacha (ph) is a pickled
calves feet and garlic. We have (INAUDIBLE),
which is a pasta dish, like a k ration butit tastes good. It s nuts.
We have darma, which is stuffed darma kishka.
When I see eating kishka here, I say, when s
the last time you ate a kishka? And they ll
say 30, 40 years ago. And they re right.
After a meal like this, you really -- you re
quite full, but you really feel satisfied.
You feel like had something, and you ve connected
with the past somewhat.
I have children and grandchildren and I really
don t envy them getting up and growing up
in this day and age. It s very difficult.
It s very hard.
Now you just feel it s nice to just relax
and snooze and talk to people and get their
ideas and their thoughts. Not so much political
but otherwise.
I m Steve Cohen. This is my brief but spectaculartake on schmoozing at a deli.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: You can watch other "Brief But Spectacular"
episodes on our website, pbs.org/newshour/brief.
Also online: the International Space Station,
astronauts celebrate the holiday with turkey
packed in a pouch, rehydrated cornbread dressing
and live football games beamed from mission
control. Find out on our Facebook page: Facebook.com/newshour.
Meanwhile, back on earth, a new trend encourages
people to ditch the shopping cart and spend
Black Friday outdoors.
All that and more is on our web site, PBS.org/newshour.
And that s the "NewsHour" for tonight. On
Friday, Mark Shields and David Brooks are
here to analyze the week s news, including
the latest Trump cabinet appointments.
I m John yang. Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening with Shields and Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS NewsHour", happy
Thanksgiving.
<Copy: Content and Programming Copyright 2016
NewsHour Productions, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Transcription Copyright 2016 CQ-Roll Call,
Inc., which takes sole responsibility for
the accuracy of the transcription. ALL RIGHTS
RESERVED. No license is granted to the user
of this material except for the user s personal
or internal use and, in such case, only one
copy may be printed, nor shall user use any
material for commercial purposes or in any
fashion that may infringe upon NewsHour Productions,
LLC, and CQ-Roll Call, Inc. s copyrights or
other proprietary rights or interests in the
material. This is not a legal transcript for
purposes of litigation.>
<Byline: John Yang, Paul Solman, William Brangham,
Martin Seemungal, Jane Ferguson, William Brangham,
Nadja Drost >
<Guest: Jill Stein, David Sanger, Vivek Murthy
>
<High: Current events in the United States,
recounting of votes to be funded by American
people who weren t satisfied with the result.
International news regarding Colombia and
Iraq. Some of this country s most iconic restaurants
reflected the cultural, social and economic
development of their times. One entrepreneur
is relying on refugees to bring their home
cooking to New York City foodies. Some fledgling
vintners are trying their hands at the ancient
craft in the unlikeliest of places, South
Africa s breathtaking vineyards near Cape
Town.>
<Spec: Food and Beverages; Lifestyle; New
York; Business; Refugees; South Africa; Agriculture;
Alcohol>
JOHN YANG, PBS ANCHOR: Good evening. I m John
Yang. Judy Woodruff is away. On the news hour
tonight, I talk with Green party nominee Jill
Stein. Why she s raising millions of dollars
for an election recount. Then, striving for
peace, the Colombian president and FARC rebels
sign a revised treaty hoping to end, 52 years
of war. Plus, on Thanksgiving day, the history
of American cuisine. We travel to the 10 restaurants
that changed the way the nation eats.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Regional food is part of
the heritage of America and it s something
that s being brought back, particularly southern
food.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
YANG: And, how one impoverished town on the
outskirts of south Africa s sprawling vineyards
is surprising the industry by building its
own winery.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Part of their project
is novelty which will take them quite far
as well. People come they want to have a look.
"Hey, these guys are doing something neat"
(END VIDEO CLIP)
YANG: All that and more on tonight s PBS Newshour.
Americans took time out today to celebrate
thanksgiving with feasts, parades and football.
In New York, the annual Macy s thanksgiving
day parade went smoothly, amidst tight security.
Thousands of heavily-armed officers were in
the streets, and police blocked intersections
with dump trucks filled with sand. Meanwhile
in Washington, president Obama, in a recorded
video message, called for unity.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
BARRACK OBAMA, PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES:
Thanksgiving reminds us that no matter our
differences, we re still one people, part
of something bigger than ourselves. We are
communities that move forward together. We
are neighbors who look out for one another,
especially those among us with the least.
We are always, simply, Americans.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
YANG: overseas, U. S. Forces helping Iraqi
troops fighting in is-held Mosul enjoyed a
welcome respite. Soldiers gathered to play
football and eat holiday dinners just south
of the frontlines.
The Islamic state also carried out a massive
suicide bombing south of Baghdad today, killing
at least 56 people, though some reports put
the toll as high as 100. 20 of the dead were
Iranian Shiite pilgrims. Another 45 people
were injured. I m joined now via skype by
special correspondent Jane Ferguson, who s
reporting for us from northern Iraq. Jane,
what can you tell us about what happened today?
JANE FERGUSON, PBS CORRESPONDENT: John, among
those killed in today s bombing were many
Iranian Shiite pilgrims on their way back
to Baghdad for a religious occasion in the
holy city of Karbala about 70 miles south
of the capital.
The suicide bomber detonated a huge truck
bomb at a busy gas and restaurant where several
buses of pilgrims were. I. S. I. S. has claimed
responsibility for the attack. The group regularly
target Shiites who they view as not true Muslims.
Meanwhile, it s Shiites militias who have
cut off the final root
[0: 05: 00. 1]
between ISIS held Mosul city and the rest
of the so-called caliphate. To the west of
Mosul, Militia is known as batter brigade
have taken control of a crucial road in and
out of Mosul which effectively cuts off ISIS
militants in Mosul city stopping them from
resupplying or retreating.
The Militias have made an unprecedented deal
with Iraqi Kurdish fighters called Peshmerga
to cooperate in cutting off Mosul. In the
east of the city, Iraqi troops have been battling
ISIS since the launch of an offensive to retake
the city over six weeks ago. They have been
engaged in street to street fighting as the
militants have dug in to the heavily populated
city.
It s a tough fight and progress is slow. They
expect it will be another two or three months
before they can take the city. Over 5,000
US Troops are in Iraq, advising and supporting
the Iraqi military, in its campaign against
ISIS rocket fire, artillery, surveillance
and special forms. John?
YANG: Jane Ferguson in Erbil, Iraq, thanks.
At least 67 workers died in southeast china
today when scaffolding collapsed at a power
plant construction site. It happened in the
city of Fengcheng, and is one of the country s
deadliest work safety accidents in more than
two years. Cement slabs and metal beams crushed
all but three of the 70 workers when a support
platform gave way.
An investigation into what caused the collapse
is underway. In Syria, rebels in the besieged
city of Aleppo have agreed to a UN plan to
allow aid deliveries and evacuate the wounded.
But UN officials said they re still waiting
for approval from the Syrian government. The
UN s humanitarian adviser said they re poised
to act once they get the go-ahead. He spoke
today in Geneva.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
JAN EGELAND, UN HUMANITARIAN TASK FORCE: The
trucks are ready, the humanitarian workers
are ready, greatest humanitarian workers will
be able to go with hundreds of truckloads
of medical equipment, food and all of the
other things needed in eastern Aleppo.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
YANG: Eastern Aleppo has been under siege
since July. Much-needed food and medical supplies
haven t been able to reach the area since
then. Separately, a US service member died
when an improvised explosive device detonated
in northern Syria. A sixth child has now died
from injuries suffered in a school bus crash
in Chattanooga, Tennessee earlier this week.
Police say, Johnthony Walker strayed from
his route and was speeding on a curvy road
when his bus ran into a tree.
He faces six counts of vehicular homicide.
Five children remain hospitalized. The bus
company has had 346 crashes over the past
two years alone. Hurricane Otto gained speed
and intensity today. It slammed into Nicaragua s
Caribbean coast as a category 2 storm. The
unusually strong, late- season hurricane packedwinds up to 110 miles an hour.
Officials evacuated more than 10,000 people,
including many who crowded onto buses bound
for shelters. Otto is expected to weaken to
a tropical storm later today. Still to come
on the Newshour, we talk to Jill Stein about
her plans to ask for an election recount.
Another peace deal to end Colombia s decades
of civil war. The surgeon general s call to
address the addiction crisis, and much more.
Jill Stein, the Green party s presidential
nominee is preparing to request recounts in
key battleground states. In just a day, she s
raised over $4 million dollars through an
online fundraising page to support recounts
in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.
Although Hillary Clinton leads president-elect
trump in the popular vote by more than 2 million
votes, she trails Mr. Trump by narrow margins
in those three states. To discuss the push
for recounts, green party presidential nominee
doctor Jill Stein joins me now from Camden,
Maine. Dr. Stein, welcome.
Let me ask you, will you be filing these requests?
I know the deadline is tomorrow in Wisconsin,
and then next week in Michigan and Pennsylvania.
Will you be filing in all three states?
JILL STEIN, GREEN PARTY PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE:
Yes, we will. The big question was whether
the American people supported this enough
that they would fund it. All we did was put
out the press release, put up a web site
[0: 10: 00. 2]
and the funding for it in. The American people
are looking for a positive step that we can
take to ensure that our votes are being counted
and that they re counted accurately.
YANG: And what s your goal with this? Do you
think you can overturn the election with these
recounts?
STEIN: I don t think that s likely and this
is not done to benefit one candidate at the
expense of the other. This is being done because
American s came out of this election, not
happy campers. 80 percent of Americans according
to the New York Times poll, felt disgusted
this election.
These were two candidates that, you know,
largely people were voting out of fear and
the question was which one do you trust less
-- you know, the most disliked and untrusted
candidates in our history. I think Americans
are looking for a way that we can improve
the system.
It s not just an academic question, but it s
the question of the job, the healthcare we
can t afford and a generation locked in debt,
non-academic is very up close and personal
and what I have been shocked by is in this
holiday weekend when usually people retreat
to the pleasures of their families and the
wonderful food and all that, you know, we
don t see that happening at all. People are
really wanting to jump forward toward creating
a political system that we feel like we can
have confidence in.
YANG: As you explain, we are talking to you
by Skype and we re hearing other news organizations
trying to reach you. Do you have any in evidence
those three states of any irregularities,
hacking, any problems in those states other
than the narrow margins? Why pick those three
states?
STEIN: Because the margins were narrow and
if they were hacking, those were the states
you would expect to see where the difference
is very close and the impact would have been
a small, statistical change that would have
changed the outcome and just left it with
a very minor difference in the votes between
the two candidates.
There is not a smoking gun here, but what
the election integrity experts tell us and
the advocates for verified voting, what they
tell us, is that -- well in fact, it s not
just them, you know, this is sort of the obvious,
the elephant s in the room. This was an election
in which we saw hacking all over the place,
we saw hacking into the democratic party database
and hacking into voter database in Illinois
and Arizona and evidence that it was attempted
much more broadly and we also saw hacking
into personal accounts.
At the same time, we have a voting system
which has been proven to basically be wide
open to hackers. That is, we have voting machines
in Wisconsin, for example, that have been
barred from California, that got actually
made illegal in California because they have
been proven to be drop-dead simple to go in
and reprogram with malicious software.
So we re sake you wouldn t get into an airplane
and wait for it to crash to decide you need
quality assurance and a backup system. Our
voting system is no less important and we re
basically calling for a system to verify voting.
We shouldn t have to show there s been a disaster
in order to safeguard a very vulnerable voting
system.
YANG: Green party nominee Jill Stein. Thankyou so much for joining us.
STEIN: Thank you so much.
YANG: To dig deeper into the recount push,
I m joined by David Sanger, national security
correspondent for the New York Times, he has
been following this story. David, welcome,
thanks for coming in on Thanksgiving day.
DAVID SANGER, SECURITY CORRESPONDENT FOR NEW
YORK TIMES: Thank you. Happy Thanksgiving
to you. We re all given thanks for Gwen s
life.
YANG: Absolutely, thank you. Where does this
talk come from? The sudden talk about recounts
in those three states come from?
SANGER: John, I think it comes from the fact
as Dr. Stein indicated the popular vote has
now risen, it s over 2 million lead for secretary
Clinton, and the margin in the three critical
states of Michigan, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania
has narrowed and that has prompted people
who have been looking at the hacking questions
and others to say if we were getting down
to such small amounts, do we need to go check
because of possibly miscounting but also because
to have the risk of hacking.
Now, when you look at Pennsylvania where the
margin is still about 70,000 or so, the chances
that this would change the result are pretty
miniscule but there may be other good reasons
for doing it anyway.
[0: 15: 00. 1]
YANG: A group of computer scientists called
the Clinton campaign last week to urge them
to do this. Do they have any evidence or any
proof that something happened in these three
states?
SANGER: They don t seem to. I think the telling
issue here is the Clinton campaign has not
asked for a recount and I think that tells
you that they don t believe this would alter
the result.
What they do have is looking at the variance
between where a number of the pre-election
polls were in, of course, as we all know,
those were notoriously bad in these cases
and where the vote count has come out, and
then some of the usual variances that you
see just precinct by precinct, and there are
always some number of precincts where it looks
like there were several more thousand voters
who came in or several thousand fewer and
it doesn t match up with the numbers.
It usually comes out in the wash of doing
the verification of the vote. But in Wisconsin
and Michigan, there are paper backups and
that s the critical thing, digitized as we
get, John. Voting is one thing where you sort
of want to take a big step back and always
have a paper backup. In Pennsylvania, that s
true only in a few parts of the state.
YANG: Dr. Stein says she doesn t think this
would change the outcome and you have suggested
it s unlikely. So what s the point of going
through this?
SANGER: One point is every state has a different
system and different levels of cyber security.
And if there was one big lesson from the 2016
election, apart from the issues between the
candidates, is that we are vulnerable to a
foreign power to come in and attempting to
influence the election and that s of course
what the intelligence agencies were saying
about the hacks of the DNC and John Podesta,
the chairman of the Clinton campaign s e-mails.
If that s the case, we have to all up our
game for sanctity of the election system.
I think if states understand, that they are
going to be required to go back and look at
the paper ballots either on a sample or full
basis, they will probably invest more in their
cyber security if they believe that there
is a chance that there could be hacking, they
need a better system.
In this particular case, when the issue is
this narrow, if they don t go back and do
it, there will be conspiracy theories between
now and 30 years from now saying the 2016
election, there was something suspect there.
So if they pass up this chance, they will
open up to the conspiracy theories having
their case even if their case is unfounded.
YANG: So, is it do it to prove that nothing
happened that there was no hacking?
SANGER: I think it s do it to be sure there
was no hacking and do it to make sure states
recognize if they don t have the best cyber
security around which includes understanding
what sort of malware can come into the systems
and investing in the front end, they probably
will have to pay a lot more money at the back
end if elections close.
Remember, the way the states are doing this
right now, you only do a recount if the two
people running are within half a percent or
less of each other. For a half of an election,
that wouldn t make sense because any sophisticated
hacker is going to know that the state s cutoff
is half of one percent and make sure the margin
is slightly larger than that to avoid an automatic
recount. So you ve got to stay one thought
out ahead of some very sophisticated hackers.
YANG: David Sanger of the New York Times.
Thanks for joining us.
SANGER: Thank you.
YANG: The president of Colombia signed a new
peace deal with FARC rebels this morning,
about six weeks after voters narrowly rejected
an earlier agreement. Days after that vote,
president Juan Manuel Santos received the
Nobel peace prize for his efforts to end that
five-decade OLD war. For more, I m joined
from Bogota by special correspondent Nadja
Drost. Nadja, how significant were the changes
that were made after the referendum?
NADJA DROST, PBS CORRESPONDENT: Well, John,
the government and the FARC said they incorporated
many if not most to have the changes that
no campaigners and opponents of the PCL had
voiced. The current PCL. That was just
[0: 20: 00. 3]
signed has included over 50 changes, among
them the FARC has promised that they will
reveal all information related to narco trafficking
and drug trafficking routes to help out law
enforcement. But could it say that many of
the changes in this new deal don t go far
enough in punishing the FARC in serious human
rights abuses.
For example, one to have the main arguments
is FARC leaders should not be able to run
for political office while still serving alternative
sentence force atrocities committed.
YANG: Why was the government insistent on
getting it renegotiated and signed quickly?
DROST: There is a real sense of urgency here
to get this peace process back on track because
simple referendum and the PCL failed on October
2nd. We have about 7,000 FARC fighters spread
out across the country in judicial limbo and
their demobilization has been paralyzed. While
there is a bilateral seize fire in place,
it s fragility was demonstrated. Earlier this
month two FARC guerillas were killed. This
weekend at least three random activists and
leaders in a social movement assassinated
and another one killed this morning.
YANG: What are the next steps? What are the
challenges in implementing this peace deal?
DROST: President Santos decided not to put
this new peace deal to a popular vote as he
did last time and it failed. Instead, he is
sending it immediately to congress for approval.
While we don t yet know if the implementation
of the deal will get fast tracked into congress
or dragged out in debates.
We know the opponents to this deal in congress
lead by former president Alavaro Uribe have
vowed to oppose the deal, but how much they ll
actually will be able to do in congress considering
they re a minority is it s not looking very
hopeful for them to actually help any legislative
changes.
YANG: Nadja, this has been a bit of a roller
coaster ride, the peace agreement reached,
rejected by the referendum, renegotiated and
signed. What s the mood of the public now?
DROST: We re here in Bogota s main square,
the Plaza Bolivar. There is definitely a sense
of, I would say, mild jubilation, but more
of that relief. However, I would say that
the patience of Colombians has been really
tested out with this peace process and it
hasn t been beneficial for anybody that this
peace deal has been going through so many
stages of limbo.
YANG: Nadja Drost in Bogota. Thanks for joining
us.
DROST: Thank you, john.
YANG: Stay with us, coming up on the Newshour,
10 restaurants that changed America. Black
south Africans entering a business that was
once off limits. And how a New York city deli
brings people together. But first, the tragic
toll of substance abuses in America. A new
surgeon general s report says it s not just
the heroin and opioid epidemic that s plaguing
the country. William Brangham has more:
WILLIAM BRANGHAM, PBS CORRESPONDENT: According
to the surgeon general s report more than
27 million Americans have problems with prescription
drugs, illegal drugs or alcohol. But just
a fraction of those people, only 10 percent,
get meaningful help. The report cites missed
opportunities for prevention and treatment
and it says our substance abuse costs the
country a staggering 440 billion a year. I m
joined by the US surgeon general Dr. Vivek
Murthy. Dr. , thank you very much for being
here.
VIVEK MURTHY, US SURGEON GENERAL: Really glad
to be with you.
BRANGHAM: This is a pretty sobering report.
Millions of people suffering, very, very few
people are getting help. When you compiled
all this data, were you surprised by what
you had found?
MURTHY: Well, I had seen the problem up close
as a doctor practicing medicine. When I came
into medicine, I expected as an internal medicine
doctor to primarily see people with diabetes,
heart disease and cancer, and I was shocked
by the number of patients who came under my
care who actually had substance abuse.
BRANGHAM: You were seeing this in private
practice before being tapped to be in the
federal government?
MURTHY: Yes, I have always seen this -- we
even -- starting in medical school itself
and then on throughout
[0: 25: 00. 1]
my medical career, the experience was not
unique to me but many of my clinician colleagues
were seeing the same thing and they were really
surprised.
When I became surgeon general and had the
privilege of travelling around the country
and hearing people s stories firsthand, I
found that every community was touched in
some way by substance abuse disorders. I went
to a small fishing village in Alaska called
Napaskiak which is accessible only by boat
and no roads to go there and even in this
small village of less than 500 people, the
small little building where they kept medications
had been broken into multiple times by people
seeking out prescription painkillers.
BRANGHAM: You say in this report that we as
a nation need to think differently about addiction
and to look at substance abuse and addiction
differently. How do we look at it now and
what would you like to see change?
MURTHY: Unfortunately, for too many people,
addiction is a disease of choice, they see
as a character flaw as evidence of moral failing,
but what we know they are clearly from the
science, is that addiction is actually none
of those things it s a chronic disease of
the brain.
We have good scientific studies that tell
us that addiction impacts the circuits in
your brain and in specific parts of the brain
that affect impulse control, decision making
and your stress and reward response. When
we understand that, we start to have a better
sense of why it is so easy for people to relapse
with substance abuse disorders and why people
experience withdrawal symptoms and cravings.
BRANGHAM: Can you explain -- that number really
jumps, 440 billion dollars in costs from substance
abuse. How do the costs add up?
MURTHY: These costs come from several streams.
One is from direct healthcare costs. Also
losses in workplace productivity as well as
criminal justice system costs. The good news
is we have evidence-based treatment and prevention
strategies at work. The problem is they re
just not getting it to enough people.
BRANGHAM: Why is that? You report details
quite a bit of these things that you argue
absolutely are proven to work but aren t being
used, why is that?
MURTHY: It s really striking and it s especially
striking when you recognize it. Not only do
we have a humanitarian reason to get treatments
to people but we know that for every dollar
that we invest in treatment we save four dollars
in healthcare costs, seven dollars in criminal
justice system costs. We have prevention programs
that are proven, that can save up to 64 dollars
for every one dollar invested.
A part of the reason that people haven t gotten
these treatments is that, as a country, number
one, we haven t invested enough in expansion
of treatment programs. Number two, we haven t
trained our clinicians widely enough in how
to recognize, diagnose and treat substance
abuse disorders and, third, there is this
ongoing, unfortunate stigma around substance
abuse disorders that prevents people fromseeking help in the first place.
BRANGHAM: On the prevention side, what is
it that works? What is it that we know can
be done to help people to stop these substanceabuse problems from developing?
MURTHY: Well, the good news is that, there
are prevention programs that don t just target
one particular kind of substance but they
can be effective reducing rates of use of
alcohol, tobacco as well as elicit substances
particularly by our youth and these programs
are varied but some of them are school-based
programs, one called the behavior game which
trains young children in how to deal with
stress in a healthy way and how to understand
some of these substances of misuse and understand
how to deal with them responsibly.
There are also community-based programs that
focus on education and on dealing with stress
in a healthy way. And this is a key point
which is, as I ve traveled around the country,
I have found many times when people are using
substances or when they begin, they begin
trying to medicate some type of pain they re
experiencing. It may not be physical pain.
It may be emotional pain or stress they re
experiencing. If we can help equip young people
in particular with healthy ways of dealing
with stress we can go a long way toward preventing
substance abuse disorders.
BRANGHAM: There are many people in the treatment
and the substance abuse world who are so cheered
by this report and it s called to action.
There are others say it is too little, too
late. I know Massachusetts senator Ed Markey
wrote that overdoses from the opioid epidemic
are still rising and he says, yet this report
fails to provide any detailed road map for
how best to curb opioid addiction. What s
your response to that?
MURTHY: A couple of things. Number one, in
this report we took a broad view of all substances.
We didn t just look at opioids but we also
looked at alcohol, and it may surprise many
people to recognize that alcohol leads to
the other substances in terms of cost and
lives lost.
So we dealt with a range of substances. If
you read the report carefully where you understand
there is in fact a road map
[0: 30: 00. 2]
for how we should approach prevention and
how we should approach treatment, there is
also attention to given to recovery because
what we have realized over time is that treatment
is not a two-week process where you go in,
get cured and are good to go. Instead, we
have to focus on long-term treatment because
this is a chronic illness. We give a fair
amount of attention to recovery services which
are the social supports and ongoing counseling
that people need in order to reduce the amount
of relapses.
My feeling is we have a number of concrete
steps in the report that communities can take
and we, in fact, dedicate the entire last
chapter of the report to action, to not just
defining the action doctors and nurses can
take but what policymakers and families and
law enforcement and teachers and educators
need to take.
This report has something for everyone. And
that s appropriate. Substance abuse disorders
touch everyone. That s something I ve seen
firsthand and we all need to play a part in
addressing addiction in America.
BRANGHAM: Alright. Dr. Vivek Murthy, surgeon
general of the United States. Thank you very
much.
MURTHY: Glad to be with you.
YANG: now, on this thanksgiving day, we devote
the rest of our broadcast to food, and a little
wine. First, economics correspondent Paul
Solman explores the histories of some of this
country s most iconic restaurants, and how
they reflected the cultural, social and economic
development of their times.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
PAUL SOLMAN, PBS NEWSHOUR ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT:
In the heart of Harlem, Sylvia s, where for
50-plus years, presidents and pop stars, tourists
and locals have feasted on down home cooking.
TREN NESS WOODS-BLACK, SYLVIA S: What we serve
here at Sylvia s is authentic, soul-food cuisine,
rich in heritage that goes back over five
generations.
SOLMAN: Tren ness Woods-Black is a granddaughter
of the late Sylvia Woods from South Carolina.
WOODS-BLACK: So, you re going to get the original
farm to table, which is what soul food is.
PAUL FREEDMAN, YALE UNIVERSITY: You can t
write a book about American food without giving
a big place to African American cuisine, which
is arguably what American cuisine is at heart.
SOLMAN: Medieval historian Paul freedman,
who turned an academic fascination with Middle
Ages cuisine into a new career in his middle
ages, chronicling American food. His new book,
"Ten Restaurants That Changed America," begins
at Delmonico s in New York s financial district,
the new nation s first real restaurant.
FREEDMAN: By real, I mean a place that offered
a choice. A large menu, and a fairly wide
range of times when the place was open instead
of saying we serve at 1:00, take it or leave
it.
SOLMAN: What fascinated me, as a money buff,
was how our restaurants track our economic
growth.
So, when Delmonico s opens in the 1830s, that s
the beginning of what we now know as the American
economy?
FREEDMAN: It coincides with an America of
railroads, of rapid expansion to the West,
of industrialization and of increasing contact
with the rest of the world. It s not a place
for people who fancy themselves as squires
or aristocrats. It s a place for enterprising
people.
SOLMAN: But they are wealthy.
FREEDMAN: Definitely.
SOLMAN: The new money wanted food that was
fancy French, with new world twists. Delmonico s
steak, a rib-eye --
FREEDMAN: They invented Lobster Newburg. They
invented Baked Alaska.
SOLMAN: They even invented brunch.
TV HOST: Delmonico s is credited with creatingthis brunch dish -- Erin.
CONTESTANT: What is Eggs Benedict?
TV HOST: Good.
SOLMAN: This was the place to meet and eat,well into the 20th century.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: We re going to Delmonico sfor supper, won t you join us?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: What will it be tonight,Delmonico s or the Plaza?
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Lunch at Delmonico s!
FREEDMAN: And men and women would show up
together at night, but at lunch, it would
be men only.
SOLMAN: Gender exclusivity, which, at the
turn of the 20th century, invited a second
of freedman s top ten to enter the fray and
helped change America s expanding economy:
Schrafft s.
I remember going to Schrafft s in the 50s
for the sundaes, I believe. The ice cream
sundaes. That was a real treat.
FREEDMAN: I too remember going there with
my grandmother. It s one of the first restaurants
to cater to women, not just by providing a
safe atmosphere, but by providing the kind
of food that women were thought to like to
eat -- light food followed by very rich desserts.
SOLMAN: But now when Schrafft s starts in
1900, what does that say about what s happening
in the American economy?
FREEDMAN: We see the rise of a middle middle
class of the sort that we know. They want
a nice experience. They want food that is
relatively simple or not particularly French.
SOLMAN: A democratized middle class.
FREEDMAN: Yes, exactly. And so the restaurant
options are often for couples, you have to
wait for Howard Johnson s and roadside restaurants
for children really to be featured.
SOLMAN: Number three: Howard Johnson s, now
nearly extinct, with just one upstate New
York outpost for fried clams and Frankforts,
down from a thousand such orange-and-blue
emporia in its mid-20th-century heyday.
FREEDMAN: In the 1920s, the American dream
was not to own a house, the American dream
was to own a car and to drive with your family
around to look at the countryside.
SOLMAN: Sunday drives.
FREEDMAN: Sunday drives. Howard Deering Johnson
developed a restaurant concept that offered
food particularly by the side of the new highways
that were opening up for leisure driving.
SOLMAN: So the advent and success of Howard
Johnson s represents a further democratization
of the American economy?
FREEDMAN: Yes, and it may be an early symbol
of the hollowing out of the middle level.
SOLMAN: With HoJo s decline tracking growing
inequality.
FREEDMAN: Because on the one hand you would
have very democratic places like McDonald s.
And on the other hand you have more and more
fancy restaurants.
SOLMAN: Hoity-toity boites like change agent
number four, Le Pavillon, where chef and owner
Henri Soule sat A-listers up front, to see
and be seen.
FREEDMAN: So lots of other places like La
Caravelle, La Grenouille, all of them begin
with Le and La, imitated this pattern.
SOLMAN: Or number five, The Four Seasons,
birthplace of seasonal menus and the modern
power lunch in an increasingly financialized
economy.
FREEDMAN: When it started to have these power
lunches it was more media people. Advertising,
TV, book publishing.
SOLMAN: That s the 60s and 70s.
FREEDMAN: 60s and 70s. I asked one of the
owners if that was still true, if there were
still literary agents and authors, and he
looked at me pityingly. He looked at me as
if I had asked to send a telegram or where
the nearest automat was.
SOLMAN: Because it had become high end finance.
FREEDMAN: It s finance and real estate. Serious
money.
SOLMAN: There s one big apple restaurant togo: number six, Mamma Leone s.
FREEDMAN: People say, well how can you have
Italian food in the United States represented
by a place that was so mass market, so touristy.
That s part of the story of food in the United
States. Mamma Leone s was a pioneer of the
spectacle restaurant. And it introduced a
lot of people to Italian food.
SOLMAN: Marking the true globalization of
the American economy.
And that was also manifest on the West Coast.
Thus, number seven, The Mandarin in San Francisco,
where in 1961 chef-owner Cecilia Chang introduced
people to Chinese food north and west of Cantonese.
FREEDMAN: Not just one province of southern
China, as had been the case with Chinese food
up to that time.
SOLMAN: OK, we ve reached 1971 and Freedman s
restaurant number eight. America was now rich
enough to start caring about something new
in its food -- how fresh it was; how safe.
Thus Chez Panisse, in Berkeley, California,
where chef-owner Alice Waters was the change
agent...
FREEDMAN: Changing the way many, many people
eat. It s influenced what public schools serve.
It s influenced what Walmart and Target have
available in their produce sections. It s
influenced restaurants pretty far down the
price food chain.
SOLMAN: Number nine? Antoine s of New Orleans,
owned and run by the same family since 1840.
An example of regional American cuisine: in
this case. Creole.
CARTOON CHARACTER: You can t beat a good old
Back-bay Bayou Bunny Bordelais, a la Antoine.
SOLMAN: America as melting pot.
CARTOON CHARACTER: ZE Antoine of New Orleans?
CARTOON CHARACTER: I don t mean Antoine of
Flatbush!
FREEDMAN: Regional food is part of the heritage
of America and it s something that s being
brought back, particularly Southern food.
SOLMAN: Which brings us back to number 10,
Sylvia s in Harlem, where the Woods family
carries on old traditions, and new ones, like
the timely Thanksgiving take-home package
for an ever busier America.
WOODS-BLACK: You ve got turkey, you have dressing,
you have collard greens, macaroni and cheese,
cornbread, sweet potato pie, you have everything
that you need that in the end, you can take
a little flour and just like, put it on your
face to make you look like a Thanksgiving
dinner superstar.
SOLMAN: Without all the effort. Time is money,
wrote Ben Franklin in 1748, which is a key
reason Americans have been eating out, ever
since.
Reporting from New York, economics correspondentPaul Solman, thoroughly sated.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: And now, a second helping of our food
theme. At a part of the country where ethnic
cuisine can be found on nearly every street
corner, one entrepreneur is relying on refugees
to bring their home cooking to New York City
foodies.
William Brangham is back with a visit to a
Long Island kitchen,
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM, PBS NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT:
It s business as usual inside the kitchen
of Eat Offbeat -- a New York City catering
company. Recipes, prepared with precision
slicing and dicing, are cooked to perfection.
But the chefs here all have one thing in common:
they re refugees, and none of them, until
recently, had any formal culinary training
MANAL KAHI, FOUNDER EAT OFFBEAT: Today, we
have chefs from Syria, Iraq, Nepal, Eritrea,
the Ivory Coast, Guinea-Conakry. They re all
working each on their own dish and we have
a few deliveries happening this afternoon.
BRANGHAM: Manal Kahi created Eat Offbeat with
her brother Wissam last year. The idea came
to them a few years before, after Kahi kept
trying different brands of American made hummus
and nothing measured up to her grandmother s
recipe.
KAHI: I had recently moved to the U.S. from
Lebanon and I kind of missed my home. In the
midst of the refugee crisis back in Lebanon,
our grandmother happens to be from Aleppo,
from Syria, originally. It was relatively
natural for us to say if you want someone
as talented as our grandmother to make hummus
for New Yorkers, maybe we should see the refugees
coming from Syria. We probably would findsomeone who s just like her.
BRANGHAM: That idea soon grew beyond just
Syrians -- Kahi believed that talented home
cooks from across the globe could offer New
Yorkers unique flavors, prepared in traditional
ways.
KAHI: Cuisines like Iraqi food, Syrian, Nepali,
Eritrean, it s not really cuisines that you
can find around every corner even here in
New York, as cosmopolitan as it can be. When
we say authentic, it s not necessarily the
way it s made in that country or it s been
made in that country hundred years ago. It s
the way they make it at home, the way they
eat it with their families. That s the way
we re selling it.
BRANGHAM: Eat Offbeat partners with the International
Rescue Committee to find their chefs, and
twelve of them are now employed with the company.
Because it s their first time working in a
professional kitchen, they need a bit of training,
and so, the culinary process is overseen by
head chef Juan Suarez De Lezo. He s worked
at some of the top restaurants in both Spain
and the U.S.
JUAN SUAREZ DE LEZO, HEAD CHEF: I m teaching
them how to move in a professional kitchen,
how to work, how to organize, how to balance
flavors, because at the end, they ve been
cooking always for their families which is
amazing, but in this case, now they re cooking
for New Yorkers. So, they need to adapt thoseflavors in somehow for the city.
BRANGHAM: For Rachana Rimal, a Nepalese chef,
she s been preparing a dish that is generally
served at special occasions in her country.
RACHANA RIMAL, CHIEF, EAT OFFBEAT: This isa chicken ball, actually.
BRANGHAM: Like a meatball?
RIMAL: Like a meatball but I put a lot of
spices on it, like onions and my ingredients
here, culmi, mustard. I put everything here.
BRANGHAM: Rimal s daughter Satakshi came to
the U.S. with her a few years ago when they
fled Nepal as a family. She works as the kitchen
manager for Eat Offbeat. With a meticulous
eye, she oversees deliveries, portion sizes,
and, for the first time in her life, keeping
her own mom in line.
SATAKSHI RIMAL, KITCHEN MANAGER, EAT OFFBEAT:
I get to boss her around here and she gets
to boss me around at home. So, I think weeven each other out pretty well.
BRANGHAM: Larry Younck is a senior refugee
resettlement officer for the United Nations
in Washington, D.C. Younck says cooking is
often a perfect job for refugees when they
first arrive to the United States.
LARRY YOUNCK, SENIOR REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT
OFFICER, UNITED NATIONS: Refugees are expected
to be self-supporting very quickly, a few
months after arriving here, and to find jobs
in the U.S. and that can be a challenge when
you don t speak English or you speak limited
English and your job skills maybe are hard
to transfer from your home country. But when
it comes to food, food communicates regardless
of whether you can speak English or not.
BRANGHAM: Younck also believes more companies
should follow Eat Offbeat s lead when it comes
to hiring refugees.
YOUNCK: What we see is refugees in general
in a lot of walks of life are much more entrepreneurial
than typically Americans are because, again,
they ve taken risks. They know what it is
to try something and maybe you succeed and
maybe you don t.
BRANGHAM: But Manal Kahi wants her company
to go further, not just to offer jobs, but
to help change the perception of refugees
as just being vulnerable, needy people.
KAHI: That s exactly what they re trying to
prove wrong. In our opinion, refugees are
very skilled. They bring with them a lot of
skills, a lot of talent, a lot of heritage
that they can share with their host communities.
And given the right opportunity, the right
space, they have a lot to contribute for the
local economy, and for the local communities.
BRANGHAM: And for employees like Satakshi
Rimal, she says the kitchen has become a place
where chefs do much more than simply cook.
RIMAL: The best I could describe is it s a
second home to everybody. It s like a bunch
of aunts coming in, cooking at a common kitchen.
And, you know, it s like joint family so you
have everything that happens in a household.
There s screaming, there s, "hey, don t put
too much of this. Don t put so much of it."Even if that s not their dish.
BRANGHAM: Eat Offbeat mainly caters to large
groups, but is hoping to expand into a delivery
service in the coming months. And as for the
hummus -- Kahi says her company s recipe would
make grandma proud.
Mmm, that is great.
For the "PBS NewsHour", I m William Brangham
in New York.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: What you may not realize about your
wasted Thanksgiving leftovers: a shocking
35 percent of turkey meat doesn t get eaten.
That s more than 200 million pounds that ends
up in landfills. Read more on our website,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
YANG: From food to drink, our Thanksgiving
meal theme continues with a story about a
new vintage from South Africa.
Special correspondent Martin Seemungal brings
us the story of some fledgling vintners trying
their hands at the ancient craft in the unlikeliest
of places.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL, PBS NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
(voice-over): South Africa s breathtaking
vineyards near Cape Town, perfectly manicured
estates spreading for miles in every direction,
famous for world class wines. But a world
away, from the sprawling townships on the
outskirts of the city -- infamous for forced
resettlement of mixed race and black South
Africans, for crime and poverty -- you have
to look pretty hard to find a common link
-- but it is there, one little square among
a sea of shacks: a man planting a vineyard.
Manelisi Mapukata is part of an innovative
collective; growing wine grapes in small plots
that will one day make wine. The township
winery started production using grapes from
those traditional winemaking areas, Sauvignon
Blanc, Chardonnay, Pinotage, but the labels
are unique... The Flats, Philippi, names from
this part of town. Ultimately, more and more
of the grapes will come from these tiny township
plots.
MANELISI MAPUKATA, VINEYARD FARMER: I feel
proud about it because if just give me enough
time also I will learn more about grapes.
How it s important to have in our townships.
People can learn. People can come to visitalso to see what is happening.
SEEMUNGAL: The vines he is planting here won t
actually be ready to bear fruit for another
three years, but after that, he will have
a guaranteed harvest every year, and that
means a guaranteed income.
That guaranteed income is an enormously important
project to the farmers. Many have spent years
growing and selling vegetables and have been
at the mercy of fluctuating prices. Those
empty rows in a section of this small plot
will soon be growing grapes and ultimately
earn annually as much as all vegetables combined.
Lulama says it will change their lives.
LULAMA, VINEYARD FARMER: It means that we
want to generate more income so that we can
put bread on the table for our children and
the generations to come.
SEEMUNGAL: They stand to double what they
are making now. The average income here is
roughly $1,800 a year. Easy to understand
why people are energized, why word is spreading.
Nomhle Zondani is marketing the Township Winery
internationally, and here in South Africa,
she also has to manage expectations amongthese first time growers.
NOMHLE ZONDANI, MARKETER, THE TOWNSHIP WINERY:
Its not going to be an easy money making scheme.
You re not going to get rich in like two years.
So, within that five years, you will get exposure.
We will bring people to say this is an idea
that we have we would love to grow it and
after five years, we would then we will have
this whatever grape we can harvest from those
vines.
SEEMUNGAL: Graham Knox is an expert with years
of experience at all levels of winemaking,
now a key partner in the township winery.
Hard as it is to believe he says the soil
in these townships is perfect for wine grapes.
GRAHAM KNOX, THE TOWNSHIP WINERY: To grow
vines in the townships brings a response of
surprise, incredulousness. And this is an
opportunity to take the land that s in the
township that doesn t have that huge price
tag to enable the ladies to benefit from their
works to make a living from growing vines
and grapes in a way that is completely impossible
in Stellenbosch.
SEEMUNGAL: Stellenbosch -- about an hour away
-- is home to some of South Africa s premier
wine estates. Warwick is one of them, a pioneer
in its own right. Nearly 40 years ago, Warwick s
Norma Ratcliffe was one of the first womento make wine in South Africa.
NORMA RATCLIFFE, WARWICK WINE ESTATE: I started
with six barrels of wine, and I went through
all the stages that they will go through,
and a part of being a woman winemaker in those
days was novelty. Part of their project is
novelty which will take them quite far as
well. People come they want to have a look.
Hey, these guys are doing something neat.
SEEMUNGAL: The plan is to showcase that novelty
by converting this old cement factory in one
of the townships to a winery Knox hopes that
in a few years time, it will be ready to process
the grapes that will be harvested here.
KNOX: And start to come in to those big windows.
SEEMUNGAL: He says it will be the focal pointof the township winery project.
KNOX: People who drink wine absolutely love
to visit wineries. International press and
wine traders are fascinated by the idea that
we want to grow grapes in the township.
SEEMUNGAL: And there is more to this story
than the novelty of growing grapes in the
township and the economic benefits it will
provide. For decades black and mixed race
south Africans were the laborers in the wine
estates. With only a few exceptions, ownership
has remained in white hands.
Arlene Van Wyk says her father and grandfather
were wine farm workers. She says the idea
of being a winegrower was always an impossible
dream. But now, she s preparing the ground
to plant her own vineyard.
ARLENE VAN WYK, VINEYARD FARMER: I ve been
waiting all my life. I ve been poor all my
life. So, now, today, even the farm workers
kids can even now become farmers.
For me, there s a big change in the last 30
years. There s a lot of white people out there
that wants to help us as colored people and
black people. The more doors it will open,
more of our black people will have opportunity
to have our own vineyards, our own wine cellars
and obviously sell the best wines.
SEEMUNGAL: Norma Ratcliffe understands the
impact apartheid had and believes this is
an important step.
RATCLIFFE: I think its going to give these
people a lot more than a stake. I think its
going to give them a bit of upliftment. It s
going to say I m doing something and I m worth
something.
SEEMUNGAL: Lulama has turned a dusty corner
of Guletu Township into an oasis of hope,
and she is deeply proud, even though it is
in the middle of a poor township.
LULAMA: I don t think the beauty of the place
matters. What matters is that you do what
you want to do. You want to succeed. You want
to reach your goals.
SEEMUNGAL: They understand success will not
come easy. But these new winegrowers -- in
the most unlikely of places are determined
to get there -- one tiny vineyard at a time.
For the "PBS NewsHour", I m Martin Seemungal
in Cape Town.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: Finally tonight, another in our "Brief
But Spectacular" series where we ask. Tonight,
we hear from Steve Cohen, owner of New York s
Second Avenue Deli, who gives us his take
on the pastrami, sliced thin with the side
of schmoozing.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
STEVE COHEN, NEW YORK S SECOND AVENUE DELI:
You meet people in the deli, and it s like
you re their best friend. I saw it here in
1981, right before Passover. My favorite part
of the job is meeting people, talking to people.
I have people that came in as customers and
now they are friends. I go to their weddings,
their bar mitzvahs, and, unfortunately, I
go to their deaths.
You know, it s a good business from a social
standpoint. As a business, it s a little difficult
kosher deli business. The food cost is quite
large. Nobody has to throw a benefit for us,
but it is a fact.
We have vats and vats of beats. It s briskets.
We have roast beefs. We have pastramis. They
have to be steamed properly. They kept properly.
So, it s just a little more difficult to run
and to make money at, to tell you the truth.
There is a lot of exclusive restaurants in
New York that shall remain nameless. You go
to those restaurants and say, look what Ihave, look what I can do.
They come to a deli and you say, you know
what? Look what we have. Look what we can
do. We re all a group and friends. And theytalk. It s the great equalizer.
When you come to New York, one of the reasons
is pastrami or deli. We have the matzo ball
soup. We have a fresh stock pot going.
Our pastrami is mouth watering. You just slice
thin. It s the bacaya (ph), which is a gift.
We have something pacha (ph) is a pickled
calves feet and garlic. We have (INAUDIBLE),
which is a pasta dish, like a k ration butit tastes good. It s nuts.
We have darma, which is stuffed darma kishka.
When I see eating kishka here, I say, when s
the last time you ate a kishka? And they ll
say 30, 40 years ago. And they re right.
After a meal like this, you really -- you re
quite full, but you really feel satisfied.
You feel like had something, and you ve connected
with the past somewhat.
I have children and grandchildren and I really
don t envy them getting up and growing up
in this day and age. It s very difficult.
It s very hard.
Now you just feel it s nice to just relax
and snooze and talk to people and get their
ideas and their thoughts. Not so much political
but otherwise.
I m Steve Cohen. This is my brief but spectaculartake on schmoozing at a deli.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
YANG: You can watch other "Brief But Spectacular"
episodes on our website, pbs.org/newshour/brief.
Also online: the International Space Station,
astronauts celebrate the holiday with turkey
packed in a pouch, rehydrated cornbread dressing
and live football games beamed from mission
control. Find out on our Facebook page: Facebook.com/newshour.
Meanwhile, back on earth, a new trend encourages
people to ditch the shopping cart and spend
Black Friday outdoors.
All that and more is on our web site, PBS.org/newshour.
And that s the "NewsHour" for tonight. On
Friday, Mark Shields and David Brooks are
here to analyze the week s news, including
the latest Trump cabinet appointments.
I m John yang. Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening with Shields and Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS NewsHour", happy
Thanksgiving.